Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, these days we are all interested in instrumentalities
of peace. We have been thinking for a long time all of us about how we can have person-to-person
contact and the interest of better understanding and eventual peace relations in the world.
In this Congress, there was no organization or new plan that started out with more skepticism
or doubt about it, more an organization. And it turned out to have general approbation
and approval in the peace corps. But we've all heard so much about in which we're so interested
in. We're very honored today to have with us the man who has organized the peace corps,
who is its general director, who's giving it the very wonderful direction. It is taking
in many nations of the world, Sergeant Sreb, Sergeant Surgat, who have you with us today,
and who have talked to my people in Tennessee and other states that may be listening and watching.
Thank you, Senator. I'm very happy to be here and have this chance to tell the people of Tennessee
on your program something about what the peace corps is doing and what it hopes to do.
Before you do that, we all call you Sorge. And everybody thinks that you might have done
a sergeant in the Army or something, but actually you weren't a sergeant where you.
No, I wasn't, but it just happened to be my name, but I do make the point that Sergeant
is the highest rank in the peace corps. We have very few actual generals or admirals,
but actually I think you were a lieutenant commander in the Navy weren't you.
That's right, yes I was. And I may say incidentally, a very successful businessman who has given
up his business to devote it to this very great cause. Well, Sergeant, Tennessee has been playing
a very important part in the peace corps not only as the daughter of our junior senator,
of our Senator Senator Gore and Nancy on one of your good volunteers and the very star,
isn't it? That's right, Nancy's worked at our headquarters and the beginning has done a fine job too.
And then I believe Sam Babitt, who is the Dean of Students at Vanderbilt University,
is part of your organization. Yes, I'm happy to say he is no longer the Dean at Vanderbilt. He's now
working full-time for us. He had a very successful and distinguished career in that work at Vanderbilt.
He did not. That's a great loss to Vanderbilt, but it's a great game to you. And then I believe
Dr. Nicholas Hobbs, who was the, or maybe is the professor's psychology at the Peabody University,
was head of the selection group for the peace corps was enough. Yes, that's true Senator.
And I think Nick Hobbs deserves a great deal of credit for the early success, which the peace
corps has gained overseas because the payoff so far as the peace corps is concerned is how well does
it do in the foreign country after the volunteers get there? How well does the volunteers do their job?
And Nick Hobbs was the person responsible for the selection of all the peace corps volunteers
who are overseas now. And we were talking about the Dean of Students at Sam Babitt,
the Dean of Students at Vanderbilt University. Yes. Well, we're proud of the part that Tennessee
is playing and has played. Now tell us just what does the peace corps do? What is your plan? What
is your program? What has your success been? Yes. Well, the peace corps today is operating in 12
different foreign countries. Right now we're concentrating in the area of education,
in health, in agriculture, and in the various skilled crafts such as the Carpenters,
Laborers, Plumbers, etc. For the most part so far we've concentrated in the education area.
And I include in that all kinds of education, primary education, high school, university education,
agricultural education, home economics, and so on. It doesn't all just take place in a classroom.
And a person to qualify does not have to be a teacher in the sense that they have a teaching
certificate here in our country. We've taken a great many bachelor's of arts or bachelor's of
science, graduates of good colleges in our country and made them into very effective teachers in
Africa and South America and over in Asia. Well, how are they getting along, Sergeant? Well,
they're getting along wonderfully well so far. The best indication Senator of their success is
the fact that every one of the countries where the peace corps is now operating has asked us to double
or triple or even quadruple the number of peace corps volunteers in those countries. And I
certainly was a recommendation now. Do you go into countries unless they ask you to and
unless they welcome you and unless they cooperate with you? No, we don't. We insist in fact that we
be invited before we go and in a cost-conscious country like ours, I think it's interesting that every
one of the nations has already voluntarily contributed money and services and other goods to the
peace corps. Without us even asking them for it, for example, one country has supplied all the
housing. A large part of the public transportation around in the country that we have to use has
been given to us. Other forms of equipment. One country in South America has provided almost a
million dollars worth of their equipment to us voluntarily. Well, I guess of course some of
these are developing nations and living conditions might not be very any too pleasant. They may have
many hardships. Do you have many complaints from the people in the peace corps? Well, we've been
lucky so far. The people who volunteer for the peace corps in the first instance are very well
motivated, highly motivated individuals and they know before they go overseas that there are going
to be problems and difficulties. But so far we've been lucky. For example, in the area of disease,
many people thought that there would be a lot of accidents or disease in many of these countries.
The United States Public Health Service is responsible for the health of the peace corps volunteers.
They have told us that they, the public health service has been surprised at the
small amount of disease which has afflicted the peace corps so far. We're very lucky that one.
How many do you have in the peace corps at the present time in that sergeant? Well, it's changing almost
hourly as we make this telecast senator between Thursday of this week and Monday of next week,
333 new volunteers will go into training with the peace corps. So as of today we have about 700 overseas.
We have 200 in training and over this weekend we'll put another 300 in training. So if you add
all that up it comes with about 1200 people. And I heard you say somewhere the other day that
only less than a half a dozen had asked to come home. Is that correct? That's right. We've brought
four home from overseas. One was what we call compassionate case because this boy's father died and
they had a large number of brothers and sisters. His mother needed him back to help support the family.
Another one was the famous postal card girl from Nigeria. The girl wrote the postal card and
creates such a ruckus at that time. Yes, she is a very kind girl too. I'm sure. Well, she was a fine girl.
She was a magna cum laude graduate of Smith College in Sudan. At least she had been trained
at Harvard and she's still working for the peace corps. I'm happy to say she's in our Washington
headquarters and in June I think it is. She's going to be married and perhaps she'll be able to
continue to work for it. When I say you have a lot of volunteers it doesn't mean that anyone who
volunteers can get in does it serge? No, it doesn't. So we're getting new volunteers now at the rate of
2000 a month. So we expect that between January and June for example about 12,000 people will volunteer
for the peace corps. We probably won't take more than 3,000 of those. So about one out of every four or
one out of every five applicants gets in. Are they mostly college graduates or young people or
what kind of people are? About 80% are college graduates now. But we hope that many more people who do not
have a college degree will volunteer for the peace corps. Countries overseas need skilled craftsman,
construction people, automacanics, diesel engineers, nurses, laboratory technicians, practical
nurses and so on. And many of these people don't have college degrees. They don't need to have a
college degree. What's more they don't have to speak the language. We teach them the language.
I can ask you what kind of training do they have before they go say they're going through some
nation and Africa, South America, Asia, what kind of training do they have? Well they get I think the
really rare type of training in that we give training in the culture, customs and traditions of
the foreign country towards their going. We train in the language. We teach them about American
history and government and politics. We give them physical education. We give them health education.
So that when they arrive in the foreign country, they arrive there knowing the history and the
culture of that country. They know the language of the country and the job that they're going to do
in that country has already been selected for them. They know what kind of work they're going to do
and they've been prepared to do that work. It starts so often in connection with our diplomats and
it may not be justified. There's a complaint that they just live to themselves and they big
capitals of the city of the countries they go to. How about the members of the peace corps? Do they
get out and mix and live with the people and get to know them and work with them directly?
Well Senator, that is one of the basic requirements of the peace corps namely that our personnel
live with the natives or the citizens of the foreign country that they're living in.
I'd say 85% of all peace corps volunteers live outside of the capital cities. The only ones who
live in a capital city are people who are teaching for example at a big university in the capital city
in Bangkok. The big university as you all know it called Chula Longcourt University. We have 10
men on the faculty of that university. So they do live in Bangkok but most by far the great majority,
maybe 80 to 90% of our people live in the rural communities of various countries.
Of course ours, the peace corps has only been going for just a few months but from people coming
from countries where peace corps has been operating it seems to me that it's already paying great
dividends what has been your experience or what's your report?
Well we agree that some of the most encouraging things have been articles written on the peace
corps by foreign journalists and by foreign celebrities even like Arnold Toyne be the famous
British historian, voluntarily wrote an article for the London Times which was printed all over
the world, commending the peace corps and telling about the volunteers that he had seen. The
Associated Press, the United Press, the British news gathering agency called Reuters.
All of these people have interviewed the peace corps and have talked to experts about the
peace corps in foreign countries. We have no way of controlling what they publish or say
and uniformly so far the reports by these nonpartisan third party groups have been
favorable to our operations. I know that the peace corps goes to a lot of neutral countries and a
lot of newly developing countries. I understand you have a number of peace corps people in the
Philippines which is a friendly nation. Why would you send a peace corps representatives to a
friendly nation? Well maybe I'm all fashioned but I believe in making better friends of the
friends you already have. I agree with you very thoroughly. There seems to be sort of a
tendency in some quarters to think that you only do business with people that you might lose
that the neutral nations are so-called neutral nations are the ones that you should curry
favor with. Well I'm in favor of working with the neutral nations. We have people in Ghana and
other neutral nations but still in all I think that one of country has proven its friendship for us
and they're trying to follow the democratic free way of life and to have trade with us and so on
that we should try to help them too and the Philippines is an outstanding example in the Pacific
of this type of favorable of country favorable to ours. I heard you say where they had 45 different
languages or dialects and that they were all being told English. Yeah that's true because
the in the Philippines one of the essential ingredients for keeping those islands together as a
nation is that they have a common language and the only language they have in common now is English.
Also we've often heard and talked about the fact that the Philippines should be a symbol in the
far east of democracy at work but we forget sometimes that the only way that the Philippines can
communicate with the rest of the Asia- a rest of Asia is an English. If they don't know English
they can't talk to the people who live in Thailand or even up in Formosa so English is essential.
It's been wonderfully accepted in the Philippines is that not true? Yes that's true.
Well what are the communists there about the Peace Corps? What's their reaction? Well it just
happens that yesterday I got a new publication issued and printed in China. It has mailed say
Tongue's picture on the cover and it's distributed all over the world this particular copy happened
to be picked up in Africa and there was a long article in there blasting the Peace Corps saying
that we were a tool of imperialist aggression that we were nested of spies that we were out to
subvert the people's liberties all over the world and it was indicative to us at any rate that the
communists don't like the Peace Corps and they don't like the Peace Corps I'm pleased. That's a good
sign you're doing a lot of good. Well how much is the Peace Corps costing this year for instance?
Well the Congress gave us 30 million dollars as senators you remember and that will be enough
to operate us through the first year and to bring about 5,000 Americans into Peace Corps service.
Right now we're asking for another 30 million dollars in addition to the first ones to bring
in an additional 5,000 people and we've been very much encouraged because the committees here on
the hill have supported our request so far. Liberals as well as reactionaries well I wish we could
go on but that's all the time we have. I want to thank you very much Sergeant Shriver for telling the
viewers of this program about the Peace Corps that's all until next week.